# Description

This project provides a reference implementation to the
[ETSI GS QKD 014 v1.1.1](https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gs/QKD/001_099/014/01.01.01_60/gs_QKD014v010101p.pdf)
standard.

# Installation

## Required OS packages

The server requires the following packages to be installed:
    * pkg-config
    * libssl-dev

On Ubuntu, these can be installed using
```bash
sudo apt install pkg-config libssl-dev
```
## Database management packages

The [Diesel](https://diesel.rs/) rust library is used to handle database
operations, including migrations.
Diesel has a dependency on the `libpq` library which needs to be installed
before installing the `diesel_cli` utility.
On Ubuntu, the `libpq` library can be installed using
```bash
sudo apt install libpq-dev
```
To install the diesel command line interface with support for PostgreSQL
databases only, run the command
```bash
cargo install diesel_cli --no-default-features --features postgres
```
To confirm that installation was successful, run the command
```bash
diesel --version
```
The output should be similar to
```
diesel 2.0.0
```

# Set up

## Diesel migrations

To run the diesel migration SQL scripts and set-up the database, run the
following command
```bash
diesel migration run
```
This command will execute the `up.sql` scripts in the `migrations` folder that
have not yet been executed on the database.

# ETSI QKD 014 Standard

The ETSI QKD 014 standard requires that mutual TLS (mTLS) authentication is
performed.
This requires both the server and the client to authenticate each other.
Most commonly, only the server's certificate is authenticated by the client,
with the server doing no such authentication.
Due to the sensitivity of the application, mTLS is required.

## Secure Application Entity (SAE)

The SAE, is referred to the client, because it is the entity that will be
issuing the requests.

## Key Management Entity (KME)

The KME, is the application that this server aims to emulate.
It will be referred to as the server.

# Certificates

A root CA will be generated and used to sign both the SAE (client) and KME
(server) certificates.
This is to emulate a certificate that is signed by a trusted Certificate
Authority (CA).

## Generate a self-signed certificate

The generation of a certificate involves the
* Generation of a private key,
* Generation of a certificate signing request, and
* Signing of the certificate.

The generation of a private key and self-signed certificate can be done using a
single command.
The `nodes` option is set such that the private key is not passphrase protected.
```bash
openssl req -x509           \
    -newkey rsa:4096        \
    -days 3650              \
    -nodes                  \
    -keyout test.key        \
    -out test.crt           \
    -subj "/CN=test_123456" \
    -addext "subjectAltName=IP:127.0.0.1"
```

## Certificate generation

All the below commands are part of the included `makefile` in the `certs`
directory.
Certificates can be generated by issuing the command
```bash
make certs
```

### Root CA

Generate a password protected root certificate.
```bash
openssl req -x509                                            \
    -newkey rsa:4096                                         \
    -days 365                                                \
    -subj "/C=MT/CN=www.merqury.eu/O=Merqury\ Cybersecurity" \
    -keyout root.key                                         \
    -out root.crt
```

### KME Certificate

Generate the KME private key and a Certificate Signing Request (CSR).
```bash
openssl req                                          \
    -newkey rsa:4096                                 \
    -nodes                                           \
    -days 365                                        \
    -subj "/C=MT/O=Key Management Ltd/CN=kme_123456" \
    -keyout kme.key                                  \
    -out kme.csr
```

Create an extensions file to specify the alternative names
```bash
echo "subjectAltName = IP:127.0.0.1" >> kme.ext
```

Sign the certificate using the root CA's key
```bash
openssl x509 -req    \
    -in kme.csr      \
    -CA root.crt     \
    -CAkey root.key  \
    -set_serial 01   \
    -days 365        \
    -extfile kme.ext \
    -out kme.crt
```

### SAE Certificate

Generate the sae private key and a Certificate Signing Request (CSR).
```bash
openssl req                                              \
    -newkey rsa:4096                                     \
    -nodes                                               \
    -days 365                                            \
    -subj "/C=MT/O=Secure Application Ltd/CN=sae_123456" \
    -keyout sae.key                                      \
    -out sae.csr
```
Create an extensions file to specify the alternative names
```bash
echo "subjectAltName = IP:127.0.0.1" >> sae.ext
```

Sign the certificate using the root CA's key
```bash
openssl x509 -req    \
    -in sae.csr      \
    -CA root.crt     \
    -CAkey root.key  \
    -set_serial 01   \
    -days 365        \
    -extfile sae.ext \
    -out sae.crt
```
## Utilities

To view the private key contents
```bash
openssl pkey -in test.key -text -noout
```

To extract the public key from the private key
```bash
openssl pkey -in test.key -pubout -out server-public.key
```

To view the Certificate Signing Request (CSR) contents
```bash
openssl req -text -in test.csr -noout
```

To examine the certificate
```bash
openssl x509 -text -in test.crt -noout
```

# Sending requests

A list of bash scripts that send test requests using `curl` can be found in the
`bin` folder.
Each script has comments describing the call's parameters.

# License

© 2023 Merqury Cybersecurity Ltd.

This project is licensed under the
[GNU Affero General Public License v3.0 only](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/agpl-3.0.txt).
If you would like to use this product under a different license, kindly contact
us on [info@merqury.eu](mailto:info@merqury.eu).
